---
title: Human Alignment Technology
excerpt: Human alignment, the process of establishing shared understanding among individuals, is crucial for effective collaboration and organization. It is essential for making civilizations flourish.
math: false
author: [Felix Dietze]
draft: true
---

# Human Alignment Technology

Human alignment, the process of establishing shared understanding among individuals, is crucial for effective collaboration and organization. It is essential for making civilizations flourish.

Alignment establishes common knowledge, common values and common goals. It finds compromises and negotiates a shared truth. It doesn't mean that everyone knows the same and has the same opinions. No individual has the capacity to carry all the knowledge. Individuals can only know a part of the whole. Instead, it means that knowledge and opinions of an individual are compatible with the ones of others. They carry a shared truth together. Once aligned, a group of humans can collectively act and reason as a unit, no matter how large. Imagine humanity acting and reasoning as a unit to solve problems and shape its own future.

If alignment is failed to establish, things derail. Opinions and knowledge diverge and become incompatible. Without alignment on common goals, collaboration becomes difficult. Misalignment leads to confusion, bad decisions and conflict. If the individuals in power are misaligned with the rest of the population, whole civilizations fall apart.

Communication is the key to achieving alignment. When one human receives new information from another, like spoken words, written text or a picture, they cannot help but integrate what they understood into their own mental model of the world. Even if they disagree. In that case they learned something about the beliefs of the other individual. Once information is sent back, the other individual does the same. A continuous information exchange over time synchronizes the mental models and world views of the two individuals and makes them more compatible. Communication aligns them. But it only works if there is a steady exchange in both directions.

How can thousands of people get aligned? They can not all come into the same room and talk to each other. They can not have the same bidirectional exchange, like two people can have. You might have experienced this problem in large video calls. Only one person can talk at a time, while everyone else listens. The talking time per person is very short and only limited exchange is happening. Fortunately, that's not the only possible mode of group communication. We can look at the evolution of communication technologies in human history and understand how they shaped the alignment between them. With that understanding, we can think about how a communication technology, which aligns a large group of humans, could look like.

Communication technology invented along human history include: Spoken language, writing, books, the printing press, mail, telephone, radio, tv, websites, search engines, internet forums, email, instant messaging, Wikipedia and social networks. Now, take a moment to think about how each of them changed the way humans can communicate and how it shaped alignment. Do humans need to be physically close to each other to communicate? How many people can communicate to how many other people? How long does it take to receive a reaction? Is information flowing in both directions or just in one?

An interesting category of those technologies are writing, books, radio and tv. They all have in common, that information is flowing in only one direction. From a few senders to potentially many receivers. There's no steady exchange between senders and receivers. The sender's knowledge, values and goals influence the world view of the receivers, but not the other way round. The receivers become more aligned with the senders, while the senders don't change their mind by this one-sided act of communication. One sided communication can only establish one-sided alignment.

With the internet, the possibilities changed dramatically. It's now easy to send information around the planet in a fraction of a second. The internet is not just a single communication medium. It's a platform to build arbitrary communication protocols on top. It unlocked new communication modes, which would not have been possible without it. Wikipedia, for example, is a communication system, which allows humans to negotiate and align on common truths. It represents a shared mental model of the world, which everyone can access and contribute to.

How does social media align people? There is certainly some communication happening between large groups of people. The communication and alignment are determined by the rules of that platform. Let's look at an imaginary new social network with the goal to align people. Let's also say that this new network does not need to earn any money. In this social network users can follow other users. Everybody can post information, which is automatically shown to all their followers. Users can give feedback in the form of clicking a like-button. In addition to that, everyone receives some posts from people they don't follow but will probably like, based on their previous like behavior. Those rules sounds like good decisions, right?

In this imaginary social network, imagine a user who posts twice as much content per day than the average user. This has the effect that this users' content is seen more often than the content of others. Therefore that user has a higher chance of gaining new followers. And the next time they post content, it will be seen by even more users than before, having an even higher chance to gain more followers. We can observe a rich-get-richer phenomenon here. It can result in users with more than 100k followers. Those users created an imbalanced, almost one-sided communication channel between them and their audience. They will never be able to consume all the posts from their followers. They established a one-sided alignment mechanism in a network that had the intention to align people.

In this network, users often share their opinions. If you agree with an opinion expressed in a post, you probably press the like-button. If you disagree, you probably don't press it. Now, since the social network shows you posts which you will probably like, it shows you opinions you will probably agree with. This kind of content recommendation automatically brings users together who agree with each-other, while separating users who disagree. It groups users by their opinions, limiting communication between those opinion groups. Those communication patterns translate into alignment patterns. The opinion groups internally are aligned, while becoming misaligned with different opinion groups over time. Just by incorporating a recommendation system into the social network, misalignment is created, the opposite of what was orignally intended.

The internet allows us to experiment with these kinds of rules. We can create completely new communication and alignment systems which can connect huge amounts of people. But as demonstrated, the choice of rules has a big impact on the information flow between all users. The obvious question now is:

Which rules enable large scale human alignment?
